-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Instructions

- replace any [...] with free text,
  and
- replace the [?] with an X if you have completed that stage,
- replace the [?] with an * if you have attempted that stage, but you know
  it doesn't work completely; document why you think it doesn't work, plus
  what you would do to fix the problem, at the end of the marksheet.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Information

So that we can calibrate and improve the assignment in the future, give us
a rough idea how long (in hours) you spent on it *in total*:

effort : 100 hours

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Citation

Clearly it might have an influence on your mark, but the use of third-party
resources is allowed *iff.* it

- hasn't been explicitly prohibited by the assignment description, *and*
- is correctly cited.

Let us know any third-party source code or resources you used (if any) so
it's clear what's your work and what isn't:

The code for the mutex_lock and mutex_unlock assesmbly functions I found here
https://stackoverflow.com/a/20115886
I changed the name from lock_mutex to mutex_lock and unlock_mutex to mutex_unlock
I also changed the default values from locked being 1 to locked being 0
and unlocked 0 to unlocked 1

The code for sem_wait and sem_post I found within the lecture slides for week 17
page 7. Process management

font for lcd
https://github.com/dhepper/font8x8/blob/master/font8x8_basic.h

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Marking

The following gives a stage-by-stage description of the assignment marking
scheme.  Note this acts as an indicative guideline only, including weights
for each more obvious aspect (e.g., functional correctness); other aspects
outside this list can warrant an increase/decrease in marks, with examples
including hard to quantify features such as style, efficiency, robustness, 
generality, or realism of a solution.  Put another way, identifying then
reasoning about these latter aspects forms part of the assessment, so they
are not (necessarily) detailed explicitly.

    Stage 1 : a baseline kernel
[X]           - pre-emptive multi-tasking                            ( 30%)
[X]           - priority-based scheduler                             ( 10%)

    Stage 2 : closed generalisations and enhancements
[X]           - fork, exec, and exit system calls                    ( 15%)
[X]           - Inter-Process Communication (IPC)                    ( 15%)

    Stage 3 : open   generalisations and enhancements                ( 30%)
[?]           - MMU-based protection and virtualisation
                *OR*
[?]           - LCD screen and PS/2 device drivers and GUI
                *OR*
[?]           - file system based on simplified, emulated disk
                *OR*
[?]           - kernel port to real, physical hardware                     

                                                                     ------
                                                                     (100%)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Documentation

Any other documentation, notes or comments that you think are important or
might be easy to overlook (e.g., a subtle issue or technique in associated
source code) should go here:

Most of the relevant documentation for the source code is written as comments within
the source code itself

I have used a priority-based scheduler to schedule the processes, these are created
in a for loop where up to a specified MAX_PROCS which I have chosen to be 32.

The first process is dedicated to the main_console so a user can execute programs
and the rest are all set up with their stack pointer at the relevant position
according to their space in the stack rather than from the start of the program
because they do not have an initial program to run on. Because each process takes
up 0x00001000 space and is situated one below the other within the stack it is
easy to set the stack pointer by simply taking away multiples of 0x00001000
according to what process is currently being set up.

Every process that is not currently running has a status of STATUS_TERMINATED
which the scheduler checks for to make sure they are not scheduled in the active
execution. Each process has a default age of 0 and a kernel wide base priority of
1. Every time a process is not chosen the age of the process increases and therefore
the corresponding priority when it is worked out next time a process is scheduled.

Instead of using yield, the timer is used from lab 4, to make the execution independent
of the programs the processes are running i.e. the program does not need to invoke
the yield system call in order for the next process to be scheduled, it will be
scheduled automatically via the timer interrupt. Each process runs for approximately
1 second before the next is executed.

The main console accepts two commands, 'execute' and 'terminate'

Execute first checks the input program against valid programs it can execute, in my case
'P3' 'P4' 'P5' and 'philosophers' (for showcasing the IPC mechanism). If one of these
programs is recognised, a fork call is made, after (a successful fork call) an exec call
is made with the address of the starting point of execution for the desired program e.g.
if 'P4' was the program that was to be executed, the point of entry for that program would
be its main function, namely 'main_P4' a variable for this is made using 'extern' and the
address for the function is applied to the return argument using a pointer.

fork works by selecting a process that is viable to be used as the child process, (a simple
for loop that checks for the next process whose status is STATUS_TERMINATED) the context from
the parent is memcpy-ied into the context of the child. the documentation of fork states
that the child process needs to have the same entry point into the program as the parent,
i.e. this means when the child (the copy of the parent) is made, it needs to start execution
at the exact point, the parent left off, while the parent is also carrying on execution at
that point, this gives the seemingly double return from fork that I have observed

The program that the parent is executing also needs to be memcpy-ied because you are copying
the whole stack space and due to the nature of how memcpy works (i.e. copies from bottom to
top of the memory) the stack space allocated to the process needs to be taken away from the
top of stack (i.e. leaving you with the bottom of the stack at point of which to start copying)

Because of the entry points needing to be the same, the parent's, stack pointer offset
from the top of its stack is worked out and also applied (taken away) to the stack pointer
of the child.

I have a global variable that keeps track of the total number of active processes i.e. any
process whose status is not STATUS_TERMINATED which I have also incremented in fork (I did
not find a use for this variable during the time I was working on this coursework)

The return of fork is also important, and came in handy to me later in my implementation
for the IPC problem. The return (i.e. the value placed into r0) of the child should be 0
indicating a successful fork, and the return of the parent should be the PID of the child
they have just created.

After fork, exec is called, it takes in an address in memory to where the entry point of the
program to be executed is located and it is placed into r0, this means when the interrupt is
made 'ctx->gpr[0]' will contain the program address that is needed. In the interrupt (that is
caused by the child) the stack pointer is reset and the program is set to ctx->gpr[0].

one a program is executing it will continue executing until a user terminates it or if the
program itself has an exit interrupt.

exit and kill are two different interrupts, one simply changing the status of the process
to STATUS_TERMINATED to stop it from being scheduled and the other killing the 
process by resetting the values.

the user needs to know the pid of the process that is currently running the program that
the user wishes to terminate and can then issue the command 'terminate x' where x is the
pid of the process they wish to kill.

the pid is converted to an int and placed once again into r0 before the interrupt where it
is taken out of ctx->gpr[0] (the process needs to be indexed in order to select it so it
is crucial to minus 1 from the value that is passed through the register because of how
indexing works) the status is also changed to STATUS_TERMINATED so that it is no longer
scheduled but also the stack pointer is reset to its initial value i.e. (0x00001000 * n)
times below the top of stack for the 0th process (the one that is executing the main
console). I added an optional return value for kill (which is found in the official
documentation) stating the return for a successful kill is 0 and -1 if unsuccessful.

Side note, (observation) if you terminate the main console i.e. with 'terminate 1' while
it is the only process actively executing then hilevel_handler_rst will be called
whereas if you terminate it while there are other processes active then the status
of the main console process will be turned to STATUS_TERMINATED and it cannot be scheduled
again, hilevel_handler_rst is only invoked when there are no active processes.

For Stage 2b to show how IPC worked I elected to use semaphores (with an additional implementation
with mutexes) to solve the dining philosophers’ program. Because I had more than one solution for
the IPC problem, the program that called fork 16 times was not the same program that
ran the philosopher logic, there was one program that ran the logic with semaphores
and one that ran it with mutexes.

I found the ARM mutex lock and unlock assembly code which I have cited above to help me
and used the sem_wait and sem_post functions from the lecture slides.

semaphore solution:
I created a new struct for a philosopher which contained, its pid within the main.
I also created a new definition for a genereic mutex that can be used for generic IPC
kernels processes, the current status, the number of times a philosopher had eaten and 
two pointers (one to left fork and one to right fork) I then created an array of 
philosophers of the given size (16) and also had an array of semaphores the same size 
at the array of philosophers, as there is one fork for each philosopher.

The semaphore solution also included a waiter which along with the fork semaphores ensured
mutual exclusion which was also a pointer to ensure that it would work globally (i.e.
across all philosophers). A philosopher needed to be hungry to be allowed to request the
waiter and once it had the waiter, (using sem_wait) it checked both its left and right
forks to make sure they were free (of course its left fork is the philosopher-to-the-left's
right fork) it then requested the forks (using sem_wait again) and released the waiter
before eating for a random amount of time before it then replaced the forks (using sem_post)

It also waited for a random amount of time before it requested the waiter. Once a philosopher
had eaten it was not hungry anymore instead it was thinking, and it also did this for a random
amount of time before it became hungry again (this prevented starvation as it gave the philosopher
next to it a chance to eat before it became hungry again) To make sure the philosophers
did not starve I kept track of how many times they ate and compared the max times eaten and 
the min times eaten every iteration of the infinite loop, and no philosopher ever starved.

I made a wait function which simply performed the "nop" operation n times where n was a
random number of processor ticks calculated from a seed from the timer that was controlling
the kernels execution.

I did not know which philosopher I had to access within the philosopher array and therefore
made use of the pid of the process in which it was executing, when the parent process returned
with the child’s pid in its register as the return value I set that to the pid within the
philosopher struct. Then inside the program that performs the philosopher logic
I made use of an interrupt to return the pid of the current executing process in the kernel
I then compared this to the pid of the philosophers in the philosopher array and got the
index of which philosopher it was within the philosopher array.

mutex solution:
The mutex solution is very similar but it does not make use of a waiter (since I wanted a
comparison) the forks are mutexes instead of semaphores and are either locked or unlocked
for a philosopher to use. The same check is done to make sure both forks are free before
atomically locking both. This could also only be done if a philosopher was hungry
and if a philosopher was thinking it also had to wait a random time before it became hungry
again.

When testing them both I found the mutex IPC solution offered a considerably lower difference
in the max meals and min meals consumed, the difference stayed as a single figure with 200+
meals having been consumed by each philosopher whereas when using the semaphore solution,
when the number of meals consumed went above 50+ I already saw double figures in the
difference of meals consumed. I am not sure why this is, potentially because of the inconsistency
of the waiter and the wait times between the solutions or the way I implemented the mutex
simply worked differently and better.

By default I have left the solution that uses semaphores to execute since this is the more 
generic IPC implementation, in my opinion though the mutex solution works much better.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
